Load-balancer for virtual machines on bare metal Kubernetes clusters (#837)
kubevirt/kubevirt.github.io: _posts/2022-04-03-Virtual-Machines-with-MetalLB.markdown

---
layout: post
author: ralavi
title: Load-balancer for VirtualMachines on bare metal Kubernetes clusters
description: This post illustrates setting up a VirtualMachine with MetalLb loadBalance service.
navbar_active: Blogs
pub-date: April 03
pub-year: 2022
category: news
tags:
[
kubevirt,
networking,
service,
load-balancer,
virtualMachine,
MetalLB
]
comments: true
---

## Introduction

> Over the last year, kubevirt has integrated with MetalLB in order to support fault-tolerant access to an application 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over the last year, KubeVirt has integrated with MetalLB in order to support fault-tolerant access to an application 
```

I believe that when we refer to the KubeVirt project, we use the CapitalSnakeCase

Author: Done

> through an external IP address. As a Cluster administrator using a bare-metal cluster, now it's possible to add MetalLB 

Reviewer: Is not the use-case for MetalLB on-premise clusters? Baremetal servers can be deployed in public cloud too.

@fedepaol please keep me honest here

Reviewer 2: Both "on premise" and "baremetal" may be non 100% correct (because there can be distributions deploy-able on premise with their own network loadbalancer), but on premise is probably better. If we want to be accurate, we can say "on premise without a load balancer", or "on premise clusters normally do not come with a network loadbalancer" or something along that line.

Author: according to metalLB [page](https://metallb.universe.tf/):
```
MetalLB is a load-balancer implementation for bare metal [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) clusters, using standard routing protocols.
```
So I think we're not miss-advertising here. no?

Author: I actually did not see @fedepaol 's comment when I posted mine on top of it. I'll change it accordingly of course :)

operator and gain a load-balancer capabilities (with Services of type LoadBalancer) to VirtualMachines.

## Introducing MetalLB

[MetalLB](https://metallb.universe.tf/) allows you to create Kubernetes services of type `LoadBalancer`, and provides network load-balancer 

> implementation in clusters that don’t run on a cloud provider, such as bare-metals.

Reviewer: bare-metals can run on a cloud provider

Author: Let's wait to see what @fedepaol says on your previous [comment](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt.github.io/pull/837#discussion_r841604077)

Author: fixed.

MetalLB is responsible for assigning/unassigning an external IP Address to your service, using IPs from pre-configured pools.
In order for the external IPs to be announced externally, MetalLB works in 2 working modes: Layer 2 and BGP modes:

- Layer 2 mode (ARP/NDP)
Layer 2 mode does not implement Load-balancing behavior provides a failover mechanism where one node owns the `LoadBalancer` service, until the node fails and 
another node is chosen. In a strict sense, this is not a real load-balancing behavior, but instead it makes the IPs reachable to 

> the local network. This method announces the IPs in ARP (for IPV4) and NDP (for IPV6) protocols over the network. From a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the local network. This method announces the IPs in ARP (for IPv4) and NDP (for IPv6) protocols over the network. From a 
```

Author: Done

network perspective, the node appears to have multiple IP addresses assigned to a network interface on the chosen node.

> - BGP mode

Reviewer: This renders as a single paragraph "BGP mode BGP mode provides..."

Author: yep I'll change it.. thanks!

BGP mode provides a real load-balancing behavior, By establishing BGP peering sessions with the network routers. They in 
turn advertise the external IPs of the `LoadBalancer` service, distributing the load over the nodes.

> To read more on MetalLB concepts, implementation and limitations, please read [here](https://metallb.universe.tf/concepts/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To read more on MetalLB concepts, implementation and limitations, please read [its documentation](https://metallb.universe.tf/concepts/).
```

Author: Done

## Demo: VirtualMachine with external IP and MetalLB load balancer

> With the following recipe we will end up with a nginx server running on a virtualMachine, accessible outside the cluster 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the following recipe we will end up with a nginx server running on a virtual machine, accessible outside the cluster 
```

Author: fixed throughout the page

> using MetalLB loadBalancer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using MetalLB load balancer.
```

Author: done.

### Demo environment setup

> We are going to use [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io) provider as an ephemeral Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: That's a very long guide, do I need to follow the Advanced part? Or build my own images?

Please mention which parts of the quick start should I follow

Author: fixed.

> To start it up follow this [guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start it up follow this [guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start).
```

Author: Done

kind: AddressPool
metadata:
  name: addresspool-sample1
  namespace: my-metallb-operator
spec:
  protocol: layer2
  addresses:
    - 172.16.0.1-172.16.0.16
EOF
```

Note: If you're running a bare-metal cluster in a colocation factory, you need to first reserve this IP Address pool from your hosting provider.
Alternatively, if you're running on a purely private cluster, you can use one of the private IP Address spaces (a.k.a RFC1918 addresses). 
Such addresses are free, and work fine as long as you’re only providing cluster services to your LAN.

#### Installing Kubevirt on the cluster

Following KubeVirt [user guide](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/operations/installation/#installing-kubevirt-on-kubernetes) to install released version v0.51.0
```bash
export RELEASE=v0.51.0
kubectl apply -f "https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/releases/download/${RELEASE}/kubevirt-operator.yaml"
kubectl apply -f "https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/releases/download/${RELEASE}/kubevirt-cr.yaml"
kubectl -n kubevirt wait kv kubevirt --timeout=360s --for condition=Available
```

Now we have a Kubernetes cluster with all the pieces to start the Demo.

### Spin up a Virtual Machine running Nginx

> Now it's time to start-up a virtualMachine running nginx, using this yaml:

Reviewer: The colon is confusing here

Author: removed.

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachine
metadata:
  name: fedora-nginx
  namespace: default
  labels:
    metallb-service: nginx
spec:
  running: true
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        metallb-service: nginx
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
            - disk:
                bus: virtio
              name: containerdisk
            - disk:
                bus: virtio
              name: cloudinitdisk
          interfaces:
            - masquerade: {}
              name: default
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 1024M
      networks:
        - name: default
          pod: {}
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      volumes:
        - containerDisk:
            image: kubevirt/fedora-cloud-container-disk-demo
          name: containerdisk
        - cloudInitNoCloud:
            userData: |-
              #!/bin/bash
              echo "fedora" |passwd fedora --stdin
              sudo yum install -y nginx
              sudo systemctl enable nginx
              sudo systemctl start nginx
          name: cloudinitdisk
EOF
```

> ### Expose the virtualMachine with a typed LoaBalancer service 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Expose the VirtualMachine with a typed LoaBalancer service 
```

Author: already changed to virtual machine

---
layout: post
author: Ram Lavi
title: Load-balancer for virtual machines on bare metal Kubernetes clusters
description: This post illustrates setting up a virtual machine with MetalLb loadBalance service.
navbar_active: Blogs
pub-date: April 03
pub-year: 2022
category: news
tags:
[
"Kubevirt",
"kubernetes",
"virtual machine",
"VM",
"load-balancer",
"MetalLB",
]
comments: true
---

## Introduction

Over the last year, Kubevirt has integrated with MetalLB in order to support fault-tolerant access to an application through an external IP address. As a Cluster administrator using a bare-metal cluster, now it's possible to add MetalLB operator and gain a load-balancer capabilities (with Services of type LoadBalancer) to virtual machines.

## Introducing MetalLB

[MetalLB](https://metallb.universe.tf/) allows you to create Kubernetes services of type `LoadBalancer`, and provides network load-balancer implementation in clusters that don’t run on a cloud provider, such as bare-metals.

> MetalLB is responsible for assigning/unassigning an external IP Address to your service, using IPs from pre-configured pools. In order for the external IPs to be announced externally, MetalLB works in 2 working modes: Layer 2 and BGP modes:

Author: done

- Layer 2 mode (ARP/NDP)

> This mode does not implement Load-balancing behavior provides a failover mechanism where one node owns the `LoadBalancer` service, until the node fails and another node is chosen. In a strict sense, this is not a real load-balancing behavior, but instead it makes the IPs reachable to the local network. This method announces the IPs in ARP (for Ipv4) and NDP (for Ipv6) protocols over the network. From a network perspective, the node appears to have multiple IP addresses assigned to a network interface on the chosen node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This mode - which does not implement Load-balancing behavior - provides a failover mechanism where a single node owns the `LoadBalancer` service, until it fails, triggering another node to be chosen as service owner. This configuration mode makes the IPs reachable from the local network. 

This method announces the IPs using ARP (for Ipv4) or NDP (for Ipv6) protocols over the network. From a network perspective, the node appears to have multiple IP addresses assigned to a network interface on the chosen node.
```

I am a bit confused about the second paragraph though ... I unfortunately cannot provide any assistance in re-writing it.

Author: rephrased, tell me what you think.

- BGP mode

> This mode provides a real load-balancing behavior, By establishing BGP peering sessions with the network routers. They in turn advertise the external IPs of the `LoadBalancer` service, distributing the load over the nodes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This mode provides real load-balancing behavior, by establishing BGP peering sessions with the network routers - which advertise the external IPs of the `LoadBalancer` service, distributing the load over the nodes.
```

Author: done

To read more on MetalLB concepts, implementation and limitations, please read [its documentation](https://metallb.universe.tf/concepts/).

## Demo: virtual machine with external IP and MetalLB load balancer

With the following recipe we will end up with a nginx server running on a virtual machine, accessible outside the cluster using MetalLB load balancer.

### Demo environment setup

We are going to use [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io) provider as an ephemeral Kubernetes cluster.
To start it up follow this [guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation).

### Installing components

#### Installing MetalLB on the cluster

There are many ways to install MetalLB. For the sake of this example, we will install MetalLB operator on the cluster. To do this, please follow this [link](https://operatorhub.io/operator/metallb-operator). Note

> that you will need `cluster-admin` privileges.

Author: done

> You can confirm the operator is installed by entering the following command:

Reviewer 3: I think it would be preferable to block until it is in the correct phase, something like:

```golang
kubectl wait -nmy-metallb-operator csv metallb-operator.v0.12.0 \
  --for=jsonpath='{.status.phase}'=Succeeded --timeout=2m
```

Author: I actually think both options are not so great.
The reason is that after installing the MetalLB operator, it takes a few moments for the csv to appear, so you'll get 
```
$ kubectl wait -nmy-metallb-operator csv metallb-operator.v0.12.0   --for=jsonpath='{.status.phase}'=Succeeded --timeout=2m
Error from server (NotFound): clusterserviceversions.operators.coreos.com "metallb-operator.v0.12.0" not found
```
Moreover, your suggestion will break as soon as they do a new operator release.

To sum it, the confirmation command `kubectl get csv -n my-metallb-operator` actually comes from the MetalLB installation guide, so I figured they know best..

Reviewer 3: > Moreover, your suggestion will break as soon as they do a new operator release.

Using a variable would address that - and still, having the version of something as part of its name is .... not a smart move. 

> I think we should keep it, as the confirmation command kubectl get csv -n my-metallb-operator I mentioned actually comes from the MetalLB installation guide, so I figure they know best..

I'm just trying to make the reader's life easier: use a blocking command that unblocks when state == desiredState is more comfortable than repeating a command until the reader sees what's expected, but feel free to discard this opinion; I won't insist.

Author: > > Moreover, your suggestion will break as soon as they do a new operator release.
> 
> Using a variable would address that - and still, having the version of something as part of its name is .... not a smart move.
> 
> > I think we should keep it, as the confirmation command kubectl get csv -n my-metallb-operator I mentioned actually comes from the MetalLB installation guide, so I figure they know best..
> 
> I'm just trying to make the reader's life easier: use a blocking command that unblocks when state == desiredState is more comfortable than repeating a command until the reader sees what's expected, but feel free to discard this opinion; I won't insist.

using the version is indeed... a choice... but it's not in our hands..
I do agree that `wait` is cooler, but still prefer the "get csv" option in this particular case. I will add a line that it may take a few seconds for the CSV to appear. Hope you find it ok by you.

Reviewer 3: It's fine.

```bash
kubectl get csv -n my-metallb-operator \
   -o custom-columns=Name:.metadata.name,Phase:.status.phase
```
Example output
```bash
Name                       Phase
metallb-operator.v0.12.0   Succeeded
```

After the operator in installed, we will create a MetalLB CR:
```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: MetalLB
metadata:
  name: metallb
  namespace: my-metallb-operator
EOF
```

Now let's set an AddressPool. In our specific example we will create the following Layer 2 address pool:

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: AddressPool
metadata:
  name: addresspool-sample1
  namespace: my-metallb-operator
spec:
  protocol: layer2
  addresses:
    - 172.18.1.1-172.18.1.16
EOF
```
> Notes:

> > - If you're running a bare-metal cluster in a colocation factory, you need to first reserve this IP Address pool from your hosting provider. Alternatively, if you're running on a purely private cluster, you can use one of the private IP Address spaces (a.k.a RFC1918 addresses). Such addresses are free, and work fine as long as you’re only providing cluster services to your LAN.

Reviewer 3: What is a colocation factory ? I would expect an explanation along the term whenever it is introduced.

I would also drop the word `purely`. It adds nothing imo.

Author: it's basically the opposite of a private cluster you spin up on a machine. it means you share the network with others (clusters, hosts, etc..), and so you need to approach your (factory) network admin to give you a lease of IPs for metalLB to use.

Author: I changed the notes a little, tell me if it's more understandable now

### Spin up a Virtual Machine running Nginx

Now it's time to start-up a virtual machine running nginx using this yaml:
The virtual machine has a `metallb-service=nginx` we created to use when creating the service.
```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachine
metadata:
  name: fedora-nginx
  namespace: default
  labels:
    metallb-service: nginx
spec:
  running: true
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        metallb-service: nginx
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
            - disk:
                bus: virtio
              name: containerdisk
            - disk:
                bus: virtio
              name: cloudinitdisk
          interfaces:
            - masquerade: {}
              name: default
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 1024M
      networks:
        - name: default
          pod: {}
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      volumes:
        - containerDisk:
            image: kubevirt/fedora-cloud-container-disk-demo
          name: containerdisk
        - cloudInitNoCloud:
            userData: |-

>               #!/bin/bash
>               echo "fedora" |passwd fedora --stdin
>               sudo yum install -y nginx
>               sudo systemctl enable nginx
>               sudo systemctl start nginx

Reviewer 3: I would prefer to see a cloud config instead of a bash script snippet:
```suggestion
              #cloud-config
              password: fedora
              chpasswd: { expire: False }
              packages:
                - nginx
              runcmd:
                - [ "systemctl", "enable", "--now", "nginx" ]
```

Author: Like! done

          name: cloudinitdisk
EOF
```

### Expose the virtual machine with a typed LoaBalancer service 

When creating the `LoadBalancer` typed service, we need to remember annotating the address-pool we want to use 
`addresspool-sample1` and also add the selector `metallb-service: nginx` 

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
kind: Service
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: metallb-nginx-svc
  namespace: default
  annotations:
    metallb.universe.tf/address-pool: addresspool-sample1
spec:
  externalTrafficPolicy: Local
  ipFamilies:
    - IPv4
  ports:
    - name: tcp-5678
      protocol: TCP
      port: 5678
      targetPort: 80
  allocateLoadBalancerNodePorts: true
  type: LoadBalancer
  ipFamilyPolicy: SingleStack

>   sessionAffinity: None

Reviewer 3: nit: This is the default; it can be omitted.

Author: only `sessionAffinity`?

Reviewer 3: `allocateLoadBalancerNodePorts` also defaults to true: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.22/#service-v1-core

If I were you, I'd check all of them are not the defaults.

Author: ack, thanks!

---
layout: post
author: Ram Lavi
title: Load-balancer for virtual machines on bare metal Kubernetes clusters
description: This post illustrates setting up a virtual machine with MetalLb loadBalance service.
navbar_active: Blogs
pub-date: April 03
pub-year: 2022
category: news
tags:
  [
    "Kubevirt",
    "kubernetes",
    "virtual machine",
    "VM",
    "load-balancer",
    "MetalLB",
  ]
comments: true
---

## Introduction

> Over the last year, Kubevirt has integrated with MetalLB in order to support fault-tolerant access to an application through an external IP address. 

Author: true :) rephrased.

> As a Cluster administrator using an on-prem cluster without a network load balancer, now it's possible to add MetalLB operator and gain a load-balancer capabilities (with Services of type LoadBalancer) to virtual machines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a Cluster administrator using an on-prem cluster without a network load balancer, now it's possible to use MetalLB operator to provide load-balancer capabilities (with Services of type LoadBalancer) to virtual machines.
```

Author: Done

> As a Cluster administrator using an on-prem cluster without a network load balancer, now it's possible to add MetalLB operator and gain a load-balancer capabilities (with Services of type LoadBalancer) to virtual machines.

Author: Done

> As a Cluster administrator using an on-prem cluster without a network load balancer, now it's possible to add MetalLB operator and gain a load-balancer capabilities (with Services of type LoadBalancer) to virtual machines.

Author: aligned to `load-balancer`

## Introducing MetalLB

[MetalLB](https://metallb.universe.tf/) allows you to create Kubernetes services of type `LoadBalancer`, and provides network load-balancer implementation in on-prem clusters that don’t run on a cloud provider.
MetalLB is responsible for assigning/unassigning an external IP Address to your service, using IPs from pre-configured pools. In order for the external IPs to be announced externally, MetalLB works in 2 modes: Layer 2 and BGP:

> - Layer 2 mode (ARP/NDP)

Author: Fixed.

This mode - which actually does not implement real Load-balancing behavior - provides a failover mechanism where a single node owns the `LoadBalancer` service, until it fails, triggering another node to be chosen as the service owner. This configuration mode makes the IPs reachable from the local network.  
In this method, the MetalLB speaker pod announces the IPs in ARP (for Ipv4) and NDP (for Ipv6) protocols over the host network. From a network perspective, the node owning the service appears to have multiple IP addresses assigned to a network interface. After traffic is routed to the node, the service proxy sends the traffic to the application pods. 

- BGP mode
This mode provides real load-balancing behavior, by establishing BGP peering sessions with the network routers - which advertise the external IPs of the `LoadBalancer` service, distributing the load over the nodes.

To read more on MetalLB concepts, implementation and limitations, please read [its documentation](https://metallb.universe.tf/concepts/).

> ## Demo: virtual machine with external IP and MetalLB load balancer

Author: Done

With the following recipe we will end up with a nginx server running on a virtual machine, accessible outside the cluster using MetalLB load balancer.

### Demo environment setup

We are going to use [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io) provider as an ephemeral Kubernetes cluster.

> To start it up follow this [guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation).

Author: Done

#### Prerequirements

- You should have `cluster-admin` privileges on the cluster.
- IP Address allocation: 

>   How you get IP address pools for MetalLB depends on your environment:

Reviewer 3: I find this sentence strangely positioned. Are you sure you want this to read:

`IP Address allocation: How you get IP address pools for MetalLB depends on your environment:` ?

Author: rephrased. what do you think?

- BGP mode:

  This mode provides real load-balancing behavior, by establishing BGP peering sessions with the network routers - which advertise the external IPs of the `LoadBalancer` service, distributing the load over the nodes.

To read more on MetalLB concepts, implementation and limitations, please read [its documentation](https://metallb.universe.tf/concepts/).

## Demo: Virtual machine with external IP and MetalLB load-balancer

With the following recipe we will end up with a nginx server running on a virtual machine, accessible outside the cluster using MetalLB load-balancer.

### Demo environment setup

We are going to use [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io) provider as an ephemeral Kubernetes cluster.
To start it up follow this [installation guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation).

#### Prerequirements

- You should have `cluster-admin` privileges on the cluster.
- Getting IP Address pools allocation for MetalLB depends on your environment:
  - If you're running a bare-metal cluster in a shared host environment, you need to first reserve this IP Address pool from your hosting provider.

>   - Alternatively, if you're running on a private cluster, you can use one of the private IP Address spaces (a.k.a RFC1918 addresses). Such addresses are free, and work fine as long as you’re only providing cluster services to your LAN.

Author: You're right, these pre-requirements certainly do not fit here. Removed
Regarding the note - I will add only the necessary things needed for this demo.

### Installing components

#### Installing MetalLB on the cluster

There are many ways to install MetalLB. For the sake of this example, we will install MetalLB operator on the cluster. To do this, please follow this [link](https://operatorhub.io/operator/metallb-operator). 
You can confirm the operator is installed by entering the following command (it may take a few seconds for the csv to appear):
```bash
kubectl get csv -n my-metallb-operator \
   -o custom-columns=Name:.metadata.name,Phase:.status.phase
```
Example output
```bash
Name                       Phase
metallb-operator.v0.12.0   Succeeded
```

After the operator in installed, we will create a MetalLB CR:
```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: MetalLB
metadata:
  name: metallb
  namespace: my-metallb-operator
EOF
```

Now let's set an AddressPool. In our specific example we will create the following Layer 2 address pool:

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: AddressPool
metadata:
  name: addresspool-sample1
  namespace: my-metallb-operator
spec:
  protocol: layer2
  addresses:
    - 172.18.1.1-172.18.1.16
EOF
```

> > Note: Since this demo is using a kind cluster, we want this range to be on the docker kind network. For more information, see [link](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/loadbalancer/)

Reviewer: This guide describes how to install MetalLB. It is confusing to list this under a section that waits for MetalLB to get installed

Author: I agree, this deserves a proper section.

  In this method, the MetalLB speaker pod announces the IPs in ARP (for IPv4) and NDP (for IPv6) protocols over the host network. From a network perspective, the node owning the service appears to have multiple IP addresses assigned to a network interface. After traffic is routed to the node, the service proxy sends the traffic to the application pods. 

- BGP mode:

  This mode provides real load-balancing behavior, by establishing BGP peering sessions with the network routers - which advertise the external IPs of the `LoadBalancer` service, distributing the load over the nodes.

To read more on MetalLB concepts, implementation and limitations, please read [its documentation](https://metallb.universe.tf/concepts/).

## Demo: Virtual machine with external IP and MetalLB load-balancer

With the following recipe we will end up with a nginx server running on a virtual machine, accessible outside the cluster using MetalLB load-balancer with Layer 2 mode.

### Demo environment setup

We are going to use [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io) provider as an ephemeral Kubernetes cluster.

> To start it up follow this [installation guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation).

Reviewer: This should be in the prerequirements section.

Also, could we change this to "First install kind on your machine following its installation guide". The installation is platform specific and may change, so it makes sense to refer an external source.

However, I would ask to list everything happening after installation here, starting with the commands starting a kind cluster.

If we split it like that, it would be clear "install kind however you want, then come back and we will prepare the environment"

Author: I agree. Done.

#### Prerequirement

This demo runs Docker on Linux, which allows sending traffic directly to the load-balancer's external IP if the IP space is within the docker IP space.

> On macOS and Windows however, docker does not expose the docker network to the host, rendering the external IP unreachable from other kind nodes. In order to workaround this, one could expose pods and services using extra port mappings as shown in the extra port mappings section of kind's [Configuration Guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/configuration#extra-port-mappings).

Reviewer: Once the kind installation is moved to this section, could we move this paragraph to a another  subsection "External IPs on macOS and Windows"?

Author: yes, but I think it this subsection should remain under `Prerequirement` section.
Done.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deploying cluster

... How to start kind
```

Author: Done

### Installing components

#### Installing MetalLB on the cluster

There are many ways to install MetalLB. For the sake of this example, we will install MetalLB operator on the cluster. To do this, please follow this [link](https://operatorhub.io/operator/metallb-operator). 
You can confirm the operator is installed by entering the following command (it may take a few seconds for the csv to appear):
```bash
kubectl get csv -n my-metallb-operator \
   -o custom-columns=Name:.metadata.name,Phase:.status.phase
```
Example output
```bash
Name                       Phase
metallb-operator.v0.12.0   Succeeded
```

After the operator in installed, we will create a MetalLB CR:
```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: MetalLB
metadata:
  name: metallb
  namespace: my-metallb-operator
EOF
```

#### Setting Address Pool to be used by the LoadBalancer

> In order to complete the Layer 2 mode configuration, we need to set a range of IP Addresses for the LoadBalancer to use. We want this range to be on the docker kind network, so by using this command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to complete the Layer 2 mode configuration, we need to set a range of IP addresses for the LoadBalancer to use. We want this range to be on the docker kind network, so by using this command:
```

Author: Done

```bash
docker network inspect -f '{{.IPAM.Config}}' kind
```

> You should get the subclass you can set the ip range from. The output should contain a cidr such as 172.18.1.0/16

Reviewer: Could you explain how this pool relates to my docker installation, and is this different on macOS, windows?

Author: The pool uses the IP space provided by kind on docker, this is only relevant for Linux. 
macOS, windows will need to set their own network, as mentioned on `External IPs on macOS and Windows` section.
I will rephrase to make that clearer, tell me what you think.

> You should get the subclass you can set the ip range from. The output should contain a cidr such as 172.18.1.0/16

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should get the subclass you can set the IP range from. The output should contain a cidr such as 172.18.1.0/16
```

Author: Done

---
layout: post
author: Ram Lavi
title: Load-balancer for virtual machines on bare metal Kubernetes clusters

> description: This post illustrates setting up a virtual machine with MetalLB loadBalance service.

Author: Done

navbar_active: Blogs
pub-date: May 03
pub-year: 2022
category: news
tags:
  [
    "Kubevirt",
    "kubernetes",
    "virtual machine",
    "VM",
    "load-balancer",
    "MetalLB",
  ]
comments: true
---

## Introduction

Over the last year, Kubevirt and MetalLB have shown to be powerful duo in order to support fault-tolerant access to an application on virtual machines through an external IP address. 
As a Cluster administrator using an on-prem cluster without a network load-balancer, now it's possible to use MetalLB operator to provide load-balancer capabilities (with Services of type `LoadBalancer`) to virtual machines.

## MetalLB

[MetalLB](https://metallb.universe.tf/) allows you to create Kubernetes services of type `LoadBalancer`, and provides network load-balancer implementation in on-prem clusters that don’t run on a cloud provider.

> MetalLB is responsible for assigning/unassigning an external IP Address to your service, using IPs from pre-configured pools. In order for the external IPs to be announced externally, MetalLB works in 2 modes: Layer 2 and BGP:

Author: Done

- Layer 2 mode (ARP/NDP):

>   This mode - which actually does not implement real Load-balancing behavior - provides a failover mechanism where a single node owns the `LoadBalancer` service, until it fails, triggering another node to be chosen as the service owner. This configuration mode makes the IPs reachable from the local network.  

Author: Done

We are going to use [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io) provider as an ephemeral Kubernetes cluster.

Prerequirements:
- First install kind on your machine following its [installation guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation).
- To use kind, you will also need to [install docker](https://docs.docker.com/install/).

#### External IPs on macOS and Windows

This demo runs Docker on Linux, which allows sending traffic directly to the load-balancer's external IP if the IP space is within the docker IP space.
On macOS and Windows however, docker does not expose the docker network to the host, rendering the external IP unreachable from other kind nodes. In order to workaround this, one could expose pods and services using extra port mappings as shown in the extra port mappings section of kind's [Configuration Guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/configuration#extra-port-mappings).

### Deploying cluster

To start a kind cluster:
```bash
kind create cluster
```

In order to interact with the specific cluster created:
```bash
kubectl cluster-info --context kind-kind
```

### Installing components

#### Installing MetalLB on the cluster

> There are [many ways](https://metallb.universe.tf/installation/) to install MetalLB. For the sake of this example, we will install MetalLB via Manifests. To do this, follow this [guide](https://metallb.universe.tf/installation/#installation-by-manifest). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are [many ways](https://metallb.universe.tf/installation/) to install MetalLB. For the sake of this example, we will install MetalLB via manifests. To do this, follow this [guide](https://metallb.universe.tf/installation/#installation-by-manifest). 
```

Author: Done

```bash
docker network inspect -f '{{.IPAM.Config}}' kind
```

You should get the subclass you can set the IP range from. The output should contain a cidr such as 172.18.0.0/16.
Using this result we will create the following Layer 2 address pool with 172.18.1.1-172.18.1.16 range:

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  namespace: metallb-system
  name: config
data:
  config: |
    address-pools:
    - name: addresspool-sample1
      protocol: layer2
      addresses:
      - 172.18.1.1-172.18.1.16
EOF
```

#### Installing Kubevirt on the cluster

Following Kubevirt [user guide](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/operations/installation/#installing-kubevirt-on-kubernetes) to install released version v0.51.0
```bash
export RELEASE=v0.51.0
kubectl apply -f "https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/releases/download/${RELEASE}/kubevirt-operator.yaml"
kubectl apply -f "https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/releases/download/${RELEASE}/kubevirt-cr.yaml"
kubectl -n kubevirt wait kv kubevirt --timeout=360s --for condition=Available
```

Now we have a Kubernetes cluster with all the pieces to start the Demo.

### Spin up a Virtual Machine running Nginx

> Now it's time to start-up a virtual machine running nginx using this yaml:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now it's time to start-up a virtual machine running nginx using the following yaml.
```

Author: Done

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachine
metadata:
  name: fedora-nginx
  namespace: default
  labels:
    metallb-service: nginx
spec:
  running: true
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        metallb-service: nginx
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
            - disk:
                bus: virtio
              name: containerdisk
            - disk:
                bus: virtio
              name: cloudinitdisk
          interfaces:
            - masquerade: {}
              name: default
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 1024M
      networks:
        - name: default
          pod: {}
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      volumes:
        - containerDisk:
            image: kubevirt/fedora-cloud-container-disk-demo
          name: containerdisk
        - cloudInitNoCloud:
            userData: |-
              #cloud-config
              password: fedora
              chpasswd: { expire: False }
              packages:
                - nginx
              runcmd:
                - [ "systemctl", "enable", "--now", "nginx" ]
          name: cloudinitdisk
EOF
```

> ### Expose the virtual machine with a typed `LoaBalancer` service 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Expose the virtual machine with a typed `LoadBalancer` service 
```

Author: Good catch! Done

When creating the `LoadBalancer` typed service, we need to remember annotating the address-pool we want to use 

> `addresspool-sample1` and also add the selector `metallb-service: nginx` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`addresspool-sample1` and also add the selector `metallb-service: nginx`:
```

Author: Done

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
kind: Service
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: metallb-nginx-svc
  namespace: default
  annotations:
    metallb.universe.tf/address-pool: addresspool-sample1
spec:
  externalTrafficPolicy: Local
  ipFamilies:
    - IPv4
  ports:
    - name: tcp-5678
      protocol: TCP
      port: 5678
      targetPort: 80
  type: LoadBalancer
  selector:
    metallb-service: nginx
EOF
```

> Notice that the service got assigned with an external IP from the range assigned by the PoolAddress: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the service got assigned with an external IP from the range assigned by the address pool: 
```

?

Author: Right, now that we are not using the MetalLB operator, `PoolAddress` has no meaning

```bash
kubectl get service -n default metallb-nginx-svc
```

> Example output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example output:
```

Author: Done

```bash
NAME                TYPE           CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)          AGE
metallb-nginx-svc   LoadBalancer   10.96.254.136   172.18.1.1    5678:32438/TCP   53s
```

### Access the virtual machine from outside the cluster

Finally, we can check that the nginx server is accessible from outside the cluster:
```bash
curl -s -o /dev/null 172.18.1.1:5678 && echo "URL exists"
```

> Example output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example output:
```

---
layout: post
author: Ram Lavi
title: Load-balancer for virtual machines on bare metal Kubernetes clusters

> description: This post illustrates setting up a virtual machine with MetalLb loadBalance service.

Author: Done

navbar_active: Blogs
pub-date: May 03
pub-year: 2022
category: news
tags:
  [
    "Kubevirt",
    "kubernetes",
    "virtual machine",
    "VM",
    "load-balancer",
    "MetalLB",
  ]
comments: true
---

## Introduction

Over the last year, Kubevirt and MetalLB have shown to be powerful duo in order to support fault-tolerant access to an application on virtual machines through an external IP address. 
As a Cluster administrator using an on-prem cluster without a network load-balancer, now it's possible to use MetalLB operator to provide load-balancer capabilities (with Services of type `LoadBalancer`) to virtual machines.

> ## Introducing MetalLB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## MetalLB
```
The headline above already says "Introduction", saying it again (despite this is not nested) seems redundant

Author: Done

- BGP mode:

  This mode provides real load-balancing behavior, by establishing BGP peering sessions with the network routers - which advertise the external IPs of the `LoadBalancer` service, distributing the load over the nodes.

To read more on MetalLB concepts, implementation and limitations, please read [its documentation](https://metallb.universe.tf/concepts/).

## Demo: Virtual machine with external IP and MetalLB load-balancer

With the following recipe we will end up with a nginx server running on a virtual machine, accessible outside the cluster using MetalLB load-balancer with Layer 2 mode.

### Demo environment setup

We are going to use [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io) provider as an ephemeral Kubernetes cluster.

#### Prerequirements

- First install kind on your machine following its [installation guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation).
- To use kind, you will also need to [install docker](https://docs.docker.com/install/).

> ##### External IPs on macOS and Windows

Reviewer: This is so nested that our website does not have a CSS style defined for it. What about removing the prerequirements headline and just keeping its list under the section above. Then you can remove one level of nesting on this one

Author: I like!

This demo runs Docker on Linux, which allows sending traffic directly to the load-balancer's external IP if the IP space is within the docker IP space.

> On macOS and Windows however, docker does not expose the docker network to the host, rendering the external IP unreachable from other kind nodes. In order to workaround this, one could expose pods and services using extra port mappings as shown in the extra port mappings section of kind's [Configuration Guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/configuration#extra-port-mappings).

Reviewer: How would I then configure the address range in the MetalLB ConfigMap?

Author: in short - the same. 

This section deals not with the MetalLB ConfigMap, but with IP choosing considerations. 
It's basically saying, if you're not using docker on linux, then you need to configure yourself the ip range is reachable from your pc console.
But once you made sure that IP is reachable, the configuring MetalLB ConfigMap is the same..

### Deploying cluster

To start a kind cluster:
```bash
kind create cluster
```

> In order to interact with the specific cluster created:

Reviewer: Sorry, I still don't understand what are you suggesting here and how is calling `cluster-info` useful in the remainder of the  post

Author: when creating kind cluster, you may have more than 1 clusters to use:
```
$ kind get clusters
kind
kind-2
```

with `kubectl cluster-info --context kind-kind` you choose to work with the specific cluster you want kubectl to point to..

Reviewer: I see, so you are calling this to make sure that in case somebody changed the kind context before running this demo, we change it back to the implicit default name "kind-kind". Should set a specific context name while calling `kind create cluster` to make the connection clear?

```bash
kubectl cluster-info --context kind-kind
```

### Installing components

#### Installing MetalLB on the cluster

There are [many ways](https://metallb.universe.tf/installation/) to install MetalLB. For the sake of this example, we will install MetalLB via Manifests. To do this, follow this [guide](https://metallb.universe.tf/installation/#installation-by-manifest). 
Confirm successful installation by waiting for MetalLB pods to have a status of Running:
```bash
kubectl get pods -n metallb-system --watch
```

> #### Setting Address Pool to be used by the LoadBalancer

Reviewer: This should not be a part of component installation

Author: I agree, moved to be under `#### Installing MetalLB on the cluster`

In order to complete the Layer 2 mode configuration, we need to set a range of IP addresses for the LoadBalancer to use. 
On Linux we can use the docker kind network (macOS and Windows users see [External IPs Prerequirement](#external-ips-on-macos-and-windows)), so by using this command:

```bash
docker network inspect -f '{{.IPAM.Config}}' kind
```

> You should get the subclass you can set the IP range from. The output should contain a cidr such as 172.18.0.0/16

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should get the subclass you can set the IP range from. The output should contain a cidr such as 172.18.0.0/16.
```

Author: Done

Using this result we will create the following Layer 2 address pool with 172.18.1.1-172.18.1.16 range:

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  namespace: metallb-system
  name: config
data:
  config: |
    address-pools:
    - name: addresspool-sample1
      protocol: layer2
      addresses:
      - 172.18.1.1-172.18.1.16
EOF
```

> #### Installing Kubevirt on the cluster

Reviewer: Could you move this under "Installing components"? That way we would split the post into:
1. Intro
2. Prerequisites
3. Cluster deployment
4. Components deployment
5. Network resources configuration
6. Network utilization

So it would run from the lowest layer to the highest.

Author: not sure I understand you. `#### Installing Kubevirt on the cluster` **is** under `### Installing components`, isn't it?

Reviewer: Nevermind. Not sure what I meant here

Reviewer 3: I think I do:

- Cluster deployment: this one is creating the kind cluster
- Components deployment: this one is installing metalLB and KubeVirt in the cluster
- Network resources configuration: this one is configuring the metalLB pool
- Network utilization: this one is creating the VM and service

Does it make sense ? I share the concern @phoracek 's mentioned in https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt.github.io/pull/837/files#r864557203 ... That is part of the cluster configuration, and probably deserves to live in a separate section.

Author: I like it. Done.
Let me know what you think

---
layout: post
author: Ram Lavi
title: Load-balancer for virtual machines on bare metal Kubernetes clusters
description: This post illustrates setting up a virtual machine with MetalLb loadBalance service.
navbar_active: Blogs

> pub-date: April 03

Reviewer: Let's update this, in case we forget to update it later before publishing

Author: Done

### Demo environment setup

We are going to use [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io) provider as an ephemeral Kubernetes cluster.

#### Prerequirements

- First install kind on your machine following its [installation guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation).
- To use kind, you will also need to [install docker](https://docs.docker.com/install/).

##### External IPs on macOS and Windows

This demo runs Docker on Linux, which allows sending traffic directly to the load-balancer's external IP if the IP space is within the docker IP space.
On macOS and Windows however, docker does not expose the docker network to the host, rendering the external IP unreachable from other kind nodes. In order to workaround this, one could expose pods and services using extra port mappings as shown in the extra port mappings section of kind's [Configuration Guide](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/configuration#extra-port-mappings).

### Deploying cluster

To start a kind cluster:
```bash
kind create cluster
```

> Then to start using the cluster:

Reviewer: How is the following command using the cluster?

Author: mmm.. let me rephrase it

```bash
kubectl cluster-info --context kind-kind
```

### Installing components

#### Installing MetalLB on the cluster

> There are many ways to install MetalLB. For the sake of this example, we will install MetalLB operator on the cluster. To do this, please follow this [link](https://operatorhub.io/operator/metallb-operator). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many ways to install MetalLB. For the sake of this example, we will install MetalLB operator on the cluster. To do this, please follow this [link](https://operatorhub.io/operator/metallb-operator) and click the Install button. 
```

> There are many ways to install MetalLB. For the sake of this example, we will install MetalLB operator on the cluster. To do this, please follow this [link](https://operatorhub.io/operator/metallb-operator). 

Reviewer: The OLM 0.21.1 installation command fails for me on a fresh kind cluster with

```
The CustomResourceDefinition "clusterserviceversions.operators.coreos.com" is invalid: metadata.annotations: Too long: must have at most 262144 bytes
```

Author: strange.. lemme try installing again

Author: Yes I see it. OLM has an open issue https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager/issues/2767 on this.
well it's not blocking or anything. Do you think we should install MetalLB a different way?

Author: I stand corrected, it's not really working.. I'll look for another way to install MetalLB

Reviewer: It failed for me on OLM 0.21.1, but 0.20.0 worked ok

Author: Moved to installing via manifest.

                - [ "systemctl", "enable", "--now", "nginx" ]
          name: cloudinitdisk
EOF
```

### Expose the virtual machine with a typed `LoaBalancer` service 

When creating the `LoadBalancer` typed service, we need to remember annotating the address-pool we want to use 
`addresspool-sample1` and also add the selector `metallb-service: nginx` 

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
kind: Service
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: metallb-nginx-svc
  namespace: default
  annotations:
    metallb.universe.tf/address-pool: addresspool-sample1
spec:
  externalTrafficPolicy: Local
  ipFamilies:
    - IPv4
  ports:
    - name: tcp-5678
      protocol: TCP
      port: 5678
      targetPort: 80
  type: LoadBalancer
  selector:
    metallb-service: nginx
EOF
```

Notice that the service got assigned with an external IP from the range assigned by the PoolAddress: 

```bash
kubectl get service -n default metallb-nginx-svc
```

Example output
```bash
NAME                TYPE           CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)          AGE
metallb-nginx-svc   LoadBalancer   10.96.254.136   172.18.1.1    5678:32438/TCP   53s
```

### Access the virtual machine from outside the cluster

> Finally, we can check that the nginx server is accessible from outside the cluster:

Reviewer: Could you add a note explaining that it may take a while before the VM becomes available? Or better, show how to wait for it to become available

Author: I added a note, though it is not related to the vm being ready. It looks like the url simply takes some time to work after setting the service. 
@fedepaol do you know why this happens? I wonder if there is something we can "wait" upon being ready and not simply wait fr the url to work..
